Good morning, Karen. Very good to have you here.
Welcome to the Health Committee.
We have you here discussing
a part of a briefing from the Prostate Cancer Foundation, and we've received
the response back from Health New Zealand on that.
We have you in here for 10 minutes to talk to that.
If you're able to, leave us some time to answer questions, that would be
appreciated by members of the committee.
We will pass it over to you to make some opening remarks. Thank you.
Thanks very much for your time. I'm Karen Bartholomew, public health physician and
chair of the National Screening Advisory Committee, here with my colleague, Jane
O'Halloran, who's deputy chair. Thanks for the opportunity to have a
conversation today. And just before we start, I did really want to
acknowledge that prostate cancer touches a large number of men and
their wider families, including my own.
And really want to acknowledge the impact of that as we talk about prostate
cancer screening in quite a technical way.
You asked about the current state of prostate cancer screening in New Zealand.
So PSA testing is widely available.
The test itself is free, and it's part of a conversation in primary care
about testing in that particular man's circumstances, and the benefits and harms of
that.
And we actually have really high levels of testing, of PSA testing, in New
Zealand, much higher than our comparator countries, probably about double
Australia, our colleagues in Australia.
So we have very high testing rates, but there is variation in
testing. For example, Maori, Pacific, and Indian men have lower rates of testing,
and there's lower rates of testing in some parts of New Zealand.
We have, I think, in New Zealand, an opportunity to really reduce
the harms from PSA testing. I think those harms are widely
recognized and understood, and we've had a number of conversations with the
Prostate Foundation and with others about that.
And to really rapidly learn, I think, from the broader international,
particularly European and our Australian colleagues' approaches to
optimizing the benefits and harms so that we can consider what that
balance looks like and whether that tips in favor of a
prostate cancer organized screening program as opposed to what we have now, which
is opportunistic testing. So I think there's a large number
of trials and pilots happening internationally, and
we have regularly reviewed, as NSAC, the evidence.
We reviewed it in 2018 and '19, 2023, and again in
'24, and we will be doing so this year because that evidence rapidly
evolves. And we have had conversations with the Praise U
pilot. I think you asked a question about that, with the Praise U pilot,
and we'll continue to do so. The Praise U pilot actually
completes this year in April, and they just had a big policy summit in
March, just the 4th of March, so a couple of weeks ago, where they
presented back some of their early findings.
And they are really starting to drill down on what a
harmonized
approach to reducing the harms and improving the benefits of prostate cancer
screening is, and they're now moving on to look at cost-effectiveness.
And we've also got the opportunity to learn from a big review in the UK,
which is similarly looking at those things as they embark on a very, very large
trial called Transform, where they're looking at quite specific
risk-based screening approaches and the introduction of new, better
imaging modalities, such as biparametric or fast MRI
scans. So it's really a time of change and evolution in this
space and an opportunity for us to really understand what that might mean in our
context.
Excellent, Karen. Thank you very much. Dr. Verhaagh.
Thanks, Dr. Bartholomew. The paragraph in the letter you
sent to the committee says that the
National Screening Advisory Committee reviewed prostate
cancer screening against eight criteria.
Could you explain the criteria that
weren't met for prostate cancer screening,
so that we can understand why it is that
it's
considered potentially harmful?
Certainly. So the eight criteria are the standard New Zealand screening
criteria. So we assess much more broadly than whether there's benefits or
harms. There's a whole range of other criteria to consider.
In particular, that assessment was of general population
prostate cancer screening, and I think there's wide international agreement
that general population,
classic PSA testing and biopsy approaches are
very unlikely ever to meet those screening criteria because of the balance of
benefits and harms. So any future assessments would be done against
a risk-based screening approach.
So Jane, did you want to talk about those two criteria
that were met?
Sorry, I just missed that, Karen. Which two are you talking about?
The two criteria that were met in the last assessment we did of prostate
screening.
Well, I was just concentrating on the...
I mean, we do have a test, but it is not very sensitive nor specific.
I mean, the key issue is around the harms
with over-diagnosis and over-treatment,
and what
other ones were you thinking about, Karen?
So the range of other criteria we consider are the cost-effectiveness or cost
benefit-
Yeah
... and that's clearly not met, and that's been confirmed again in the large UK
cost-effectiveness analysis just released in December 2025.
And they actually looked at quite a large number of those stratified approaches,
and they're not yet cost-effective.
But I think the opportunity with Praise U
is that if there's refinement of those benefits and harms, it may become
cost-effective for some of those strategies.
So cost-effectiveness was definitely one that wasn't met, as was health
capacity, health system capacity,
and particularly, there's a number of other criteria about social
and ethical issues in terms of informed consent.
Yeah.
But we can provide a list of what that assessment is to the committee, if that's
useful.
So-
Yeah.
Next one. So just for clarification, so when
the potential prostate screening
program was evaluated, that was just based on a PSA
test and no stratification, just on the PSA test?
And is that my understanding?
Yes. The last evaluation that we did, that was what it was based on as
most international programs similar to ours, international committees that
provide advice on screening, similarly based on that.
And I think from now on, as the opportunity, as the evidence comes out,
to actually consider quite specific detail of risk-stratified approaches.
Risk-stratified approaches are much more complex with a large number of potential
combinations that quite markedly affect the benefit and
cost, and risk profile.
And very much.
And just following up there, but appreciate one of the concerns is
over-treatment, and the adverse effects of that.
In the letter that you have provided, you go through numbers.
Can you tell the committee how that
kind of compares to, say, the breast cancer screening program?
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
The risk of over-diagnosis and over-treatment is substantially higher for prostate
than any of the other comparable programs.
So the estimates of over-diagnosis range from about
40% to 70%.
So that means that
for every life saved, two to three prostate cancers are
over-diagnosed.
So that's quite a significant level of over-diagnosis.
For example, the comparison in breast is the level in breast is
approximately 20% over-diagnosis.
And the
harms related to over-diagnosis in prostate are quite a different profile as well
because of the harms with biopsies, which
have particular set of harms, and then the surgery, radiotherapy,
et cetera, have additional harms.
So it's
really the consequential harms, not just the quantum of
over-diagnosis that's particularly problematic.
Sorry. Did you say 40, four, zero percent to
70%, seven, zero?
Correct, over-diagnosed. So most cancers that are diagnosed with PSA
testing are over-diagnosed, which is why in the
treatment pathway, active surveillance, which is
where those cancers are not treated, but they are surveilled over time.
Approximately 88% of prostate cancers in Australia and New
Zealand are under active surveillance.
Sorry, can I just have a-
I'll come to Dr. Fletcher.
So with stratification and additional imaging, you
expect that number to decrease?
Absolutely. MRI by itself reduces the
harms, particularly related to biopsy.
So it reduces the number of biopsies needed and their consequent harms.
And there are a number of risks calculators that are used
in addition to MRI, and that also changes the
profile. And there's quite a few options for risk
calculators, and there's quite a few options for when those calculators are
conducted prior to biopsy or after biopsy.
Thank you for your patience, Sasha.
There's also advocacy that the bowel cancer
screening age gets reduced and that new screening for former
smokers for lung cancer gets introduced.
Can you give an
indication of the comparable cost efficacy
of those interventions relative to prostate screening, please?
Thank you.
Certainly, lung cancer screening, NSAC has assessed the evidence on lung
cancer screening, and there is a very, very clear
benefit to lung cancer screening, estimated to be a life saved
a day from that program. And there's also clear
cost-effectiveness for a lung cancer screening approach, which is a targeted
screening program.
There's probably no other comparable screening program that has that level of
benefit,
and perhaps no other health intervention that has that level of benefit.
So certainly from a potential new screening program
introduction, lung cancer screening has a significant health benefit.
And
NSAC has certainly recommended and supported lung cancer screening.
In terms of bowel cancer screening, that similarly has a really
significant benefit profile,
and a large number of lives saved with extending age ranges.
And we have modeling on that that supported age range extension decisions.
NSAC has considered that quite specifically.
You've been quite definitive in that answer.
So are you saying those are cost-saving
across the health system and prostate screening is not, or are
you saying they are
more cost-effective, but none of them are cost-saving?
I don't think any screening program, as far as I know, is cost-saving, but
lung is probably the closest to that.
It is highly cost-effective. And prostate cancer screening, as far as we
know, is not cost-effective. The UK evidence, even with
MRI to reduce harms and even with risk
stratified triage approaches, so PSA-based or age-based,
is not cost-effective. In the UK, they've only said bracket testing
is likely to be cost-effective.
Thank you, Dr. Bartholomew. And thank you, Jane, as well.
Very good to have you here today.
We've reached our time, but appreciate the responses that you've given us in
this paper and to the committee today.
Oh, Mr. Chair, just one other point.
Dr. Allen.
The officials mentioned
the assessment against the eight criteria, if that could be shared with the-
Yes, they did
... the committee, please.
Thanks.
Certainly. Thank you.
Have a good day.
They do have shared outside.
We'll move to private, please.
Thank you.